---
meta:
  heading: De Waalbrug
  period: [1920]
viewer:
  bbox: [5.815903,51.83391,5.926526,51.900922]
  rotation: 0
allmaps:
  - label: Rivermap, Second revision, series II, 1920, 900 x 600mm, Scale 1:10,000, G.H.Goudriaan, Geoplaza, VU Amsterdam
    annotation: oldmap.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---

## De Waalbrug

and the effects of local protest informing the planning of infrastructure


For centuries, the lower town was the focal point of Nijmegen's economy. Owing to the increased traffic on the Waal, the municipality initiated the construction of the bridge from east of Lent to Belvédère (upper town) in 1911. This plan to build a road bridge on the edge of the city of Nijmegen offers greater spatial flexibility in transport planning on national level. Even though shopkeepers of the lower town disagreed and protested against this location as it would have negatively affected their business their efforts would prove to be only a delay in the implementation of the plan which was completed in 1936 with support from Ministry of Water Management. 

What if the protests succeeded and the bridge was built and ended at Ganzenheuvel (lower town) as the shopkeepers proposed before Het Rijkswegenplan 1927 (National Road Program) was passed? The contribution speculates on how this would have changed the development pattern of Lent and Nijmegen as a whole.

If the bridge landing was at Ganzenheuvel, besides a different spatial expansion of Nijmegen and Lent, there would be concentration of recreation and trade on the waalkade and the quay of Lent respectively. This would lead to a different image of Nijmegen’s riverbank as a center for both trade and recreation. It would impact the river management plan for the room for the river project in 2012, initiating a different location for flood management.

The scenario proposed explores an alternative in terms of the national connectivity and the support for the local economy of the old town. The bridge could have given an opportunity for the coexistence of trade and recreation in a river city.

Contribution by:
Sneha Gireesh, Han Yang
