---
meta:
  heading: Waalbrug
  period: [2010]
viewer:
  bbox: [5.843347,51.84285,5.876014,51.863026]
  rotation: 0
geojson:
  - filename: olddike.geojson
    label: Old Dike
  - filename: newdike.geojson
    label: New Dike
allmaps:
  - label: Change of Water Lever, 1921
    annotation: riverchange.json
    opacity: 50
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
  - label: Photo of Lent, 2020
    annotation: lentphoto.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---

### _iv.    Dike Set Back_

Leonidov takes a clear approach to reject local urban housing models like Heijplaat and Spangen. The new plan will change the spatial and social relationships between workers and industrial sites from a paternalistic dependence to a form of sovereignty and responsibility. Rather than the Garden City, the settlement will follow a disurbanist vision shaped by social concerns and the organization of the masses. Leonidov’s proposal builds collective engagement between housing, industry, leisure, and transportation.

The settlement is composed of three equal strips, dividing housing and public facilities such as medical centers, sporting facilities, and other social infrastructure. Subdivided into squares, each block can adopt the necessary programs to address the needs of the residents in the central strip. The square serves as the geometrical and organizing principle for the city from the scale of the block to that of the room. Residential communes are the only housing option provided, and complete socialization of life will rely on each worker identifying with and contributing to the communal unit to which they belong.


- _Heijplaat Plattegrond, 1921_
- _Spangen Plattegrond, 1915_
- _Housing Strip, Ivan Leonidov, 1928_

