---
meta:
  heading: Slotermeer
viewer:
  bbox: [4.80119,52.362261,4.857649,52.386134]
  rotation: 0
geojson:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
    label: Locations
legend:
  - label: Area of study
    fill: '#ffff54'
    fill-opacity: 1
    stroke: '#ffff54'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---
# The evolution of public space in Slotermeer depicts the search for balance between safety, privacy and the original design values of the 50s.
Slotermeer was constructed in 1952 as part of the General Expansion Plan of Amsterdam proposed by Cornelis van Eesteren. The area is known as the Western Garden Cities where van Eesteren applied ideas from Ebenezer Howard to build neighborhoods with their own essential facilities, away from the city center. In the 1990s, the Western Garden Cities went through urban renewal processes due to increasing social issues such as nuisance and crime, leading to demolition on different locations. In 2007, housing blocks in Slotermeer were registered as preserved cityscape at the instigation of the residents. In the meantime, public spaces in this area were constantly rearranged, responding to local concerns and an increasing focus on safety in design culture.

Accessibility and freedom of movement were present at the core of what originally guided the design of public spaces in the Western Garden Cities. Typical spaces were the playgrounds systematically included in the plan and communal gardens envisaged between the buildings. An evolution of the playgrounds can be traced in the Jan Postmahof. Originally constructed with a fragmented layout and abstract play objects following Aldo van Eyck’s principles, it was renewed two decades after completion and the vegetation around the playground was densified to provide more privacy for the residents. In the 2000s, conventional slides and swings were installed. With a focus on safety, the 2017 renovation was achieved with softer materials and an enclosing bench. The communal gardens, initially characterized by their openness, were gradually planted more intensively after the 2000s. Alongside the housing renovation in 2017, visibility was brought back, but the garden that was once open to the public was privatized.

The appearance of the original public spaces as realized in the 1950s was brought back intentionally since the site’s registration as a protected cityscape in 2007. However, the gardens and playground changes revealed that the balance was still in search, between celebrating historical design values and fulfilling unresolved social and safety concerns.
