---
meta:
  heading: Project NL
viewer:
  bbox: [4.806266,52.296147,5.027182,52.417977]
  rotation: 140
geojson:
  - filename:
    label:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
    label: Locations
xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: Base Map Bijlmermeer
    annotation: MotherMap_Biljmeer.json
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
  - label: Base Map
    annotation: MotherMap.json
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
  - label: Uilenburg
    annotation: 
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: 
      threshold: 
      hardness: 
    colorize: "#570a0a"
  - label: Houthavens
    annotation: 
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: 
      threshold: 
      hardness: 
    colorize: "#570a0a"
  - label: Helmersbuurt
    annotation: 
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: 
      threshold: 
      hardness: 
    colorize: "#570a0a"
  - label: Amsterdam Plan Tuistad-Slotermeer, 1952, scale 1:10.000
    annotation: 
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: 
      threshold: 
      hardness: 
    colorize: "#570a0a"
  - label: vijzelstraat
    annotation: 
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: 
      threshold: 
      hardness: 
    colorize: "#570a0a"
  - label: bijlmermeer
    annotation: 
    opacity: 100
    saturation: 100
    removeBackground:
      color: 
      threshold: 
      hardness: 
    colorize: "#570a0a"
mapbox:
  styleUrl: 'mapbox://styles/momokb/clpqw96dn016901r52ys29agm/draft'
  accessToken: 'pk.eyJ1IjoibW9tb2tiIiwiYSI6ImNsbmJxcGtrODBkYnUyaXI3Yjl2ODR1NTkifQ.OvugAnw_FwWro66sJ7Rl5A'
---
## Part II: Argumentation

In Part II, documentation turns into argumentation by producing three synthetic drawings that select specific aspects of each site’s transformation through time and scale. The drawings either affirm, broaden or complement a common historical narrative of each site and are composed of comparative, juxtapositioned and/or overlayed drawn evidence over the course of four centuries. The project investigates spatial transformation from the city scale to the domestic space and identifies the trends that were taking place within the respective urban and social context of each site. Considering their early formation and a long timeline of transformation, Uilenburg and Vijzelstraat, influenced by economic growth, demographic change and technological advancement, dealt with large demolitions, changes in infrastructure and scale. In contrast, the neighborhood of Helmersbuurt, driven by similar factors, underlies urban planning interventions and small-scale unit alterations that nonetheless preserved its architectural heritage over time. For Houthavens the technological advancement and substitution of materials also had a significant impact on the transformation of the former timber port into a residential area in terms of planning, land manipulation, program and construction logic. The more recently developed neighborhoods of Slotermeer and Bijlmermeer investigate the expansion, restoration and redefinition that the communal space was subjected to, driven by the social aspects. The realized proposals of the first, aim to enforce safety and target unresolved social concerns and the unrealized scenarios of the latter, examine the relationship of the built volumes on the vast public space.


The collective outcome is a physical and digital atlas that are interrelated in means of communication and representation of information. The physical drawings are developed in the scales of 1:1000, 1:200 and 1:50 and use a uniformal architectural language to provoke reflection not only within the historical narrative of the corresponding site but amongst all of them in parallel. The project focuses on the spatial documentation of these sites such as city or building plans, permits and regulations in order to select the content depicted in the atlas. The drawings are photographed, digitized and geo-referenced to then be collected with the aid of digital tools, on an interactive digital platform where it is possible to navigate through all sites simultaneously and compare in different scales. There is a visible link between the physical and the digital drawings that indicates which part has been geo-referenced. The project therefore aims to create a user-friendly environment that connects the physical and the digital atlas that are shareable and available to all.


The source code of this website can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/theberlage/city-atlas-app). Coding by Jules Schoonman and Bert Spaan.