---
meta:
  heading: Waterschappen
  period: [1881]
viewer:
  bbox: [4.493838,51.745164,4.992433,51.996807]
  rotation: 0
allmaps:
  - label: Speculative Water Management Map of Gorinchem, Gorinchem 3 no. 38. First Edition, series 1, 2023.  555 x 690 mm. Scale 1:10000. The Berlage. Based on Water Management Map 38 Gorinchem 3. First Edition, series 1, 1881. 690 x 555 mm. Scale 1:10000. Rijkswaterstaat.
    annotation: gorinchemmap1881.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---

## Waterschappen

## and the mediation of local risk, scales of collectivity, and the allocation of resources for water management


For centuries, the lower town was the focal point of Nijmegen's economy. Owing to the increased traffic on the Waal, the municipality initiated the construction of the bridge from east of Lent to Belvédère (upper town). Even though shopkeepers of the lower town disagreed and protested against this location as it would have negatively affected their business their efforts would prove to be only a delay in the implementation of the plan.

What if the protests succeeded and the bridge landing was at Ganzenheuvel (lower town) as the shopkeepers proposed? The contribution speculates on how this would have changed the development pattern of Ganzenheuvel and Nijmegen as a whole.

If the bridge landing was at Ganzenheuvel, besides a different spatial expansion of Nijmegen and Lent, there would be concentration of recreation and trade on the waalkade and the quay of Lent respectively. This would lead to a different image of Nijmegen’s riverbank as a center for both trade and recreation. It would impact the river management plan for the room for the river project in 2012, initiating a different location for flood management.

The scenario proposed explores an alternative in terms of the national connectivity and the support for the local economy of the old town. The bridge could have given an opportunity for the coexistence of trade and recreation in a river city.

Contribtuions by:
Nicolaos Charalambous, Kelly Olinger