---
meta:
  heading: Houthavens
viewer:
  bbox: [4.874509,52.389354,4.890438,52.399301]
  rotation: 
geojson:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
    label: Locations
legend:
  - label: Houthavens
    fill:
    fill-opacity:
    stroke: '#ffe000'
    stroke-opacity:
---
# General Argument 
Houthavens is a former timber port constructed in 1876 as a result of the northwestern Port of Amsterdam expansion. Ever since, it has experienced a programmatic shift - from industrial to residential - leading to adjustments in building and land outlines, methods of construction and materiality. Laterally, distinctions within this effort to resemble the past specify each of the site’s transformation phases overtime.
In the late Nineteenth Century, dissimilar to ongoing practices based on land reclamation, an excavation process shaped the port’s configuration. The comb-like structure, retained with wooden walls, was occupied with warehouses built by private wooden companies. The emergence of new modes of transportation and substitution of construction materials in the Twentieth Century, resulted in the filling of the canals and the shed’s demolition. Housing demand and real estate speculation triggered the elaboration of the Houthaven’s Masterplan, while developers and contractors, together with the municipality, projected 2.700 new homes distributed in seven elongated islands. In the early 2000s, great part of the water was claimed and filled with sand. Medium-rise concrete buildings with underground levels started to be built, using sheet piles and heavy machinery. Only after its conclusion, canals were dug, establishing a reversed process of excavation vs. filling. 
The area’s relation to the water is assumed to be what prompted the reedition of the Houthavens spatiality. Reintegration of water into daily life, despite programmatic turns, was only possible due to advancements in construction processes/materials. These same processes, however, are what closely make the reeditions differ, bringing a parallel perspective towards renovation approaches.
