---
meta:
  heading: Slotermeer
viewer:
  bbox: [4.746455,52.287867,5.001268,52.404853]
  rotation: 0
xyz:
allmaps:
  - label: Algemeen Uitbreidingsplan van Amsterdam, C. A. van Eesteren, 1934. Scale 1:12,500. Stadsarchief Amsterdam. Published by the Public Works Department and its legal successors, 1934
    annotation: AUP-1934.json
    opacity: 100
geojson:
---
# Slotermeer
Slotermeer, part of the General Expansion Plan (AUP) of Amsterdam proposed by Van Eesteren in 1934 to meet the urgently increasing housing demand, was realized between 1952 and 1965. In the 1990s, poor housing conditions and increasing social issues in the area resulted in plans for large-scale demolition. Opposing the drastic intervention, residents in Slotermeer instigated activities bringing the distinct council's attention to recognize the architectural and historical value of the building, later getting the area registered as a preserved cityscape in 2007. Since then, the approach towards the neighborhood shifted to renovation focusing on the housing blocks.

The greenery and play spaces have been fundamental elements in the design since the beginning. In the early 2000s, while the discussion between demolition and renovation mainly addressed the housing blocks, communal garden and the playground on the street of Jan Postmanhof went through alterations against the original principles to increase the privacy for residents without much public attention. In 2015, alongside the renovation of Airey Houses which maintained the structural frame of housing blocks the same, the layout of the courtyard shifted back to simple grass to improve visibility from the street. Also, the playground was re-implemented with neutral play equipment that provoked creative games. The outline of the recent transformation showed its intention to bring back partial initial design principles. However, as more importance was given to safety, multiple different elements were added to enclose the communal spaces.

With the map from the early stage of the expansion, notions of the garden city was depicted: density should be smaller in areas outside the railways, lake would be located as the center in the expansion, and the vegetation would be planned as a continuous system.