---
meta:
  heading: Helmersbuurt
viewer:
  bbox: [4.862936,52.358909,4.886203,52.368753]
  rotation: 25
geojson:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
    label: Locations
legend:
  - label: Area of study
    fill: '#ffff54'
    fill-opacity: 1
    stroke: '#ffff54'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---
# General Argument
Helmersbuurt forms part of Amsterdam's Nineteenth Century ring extension proposed in Jan Kalff’s expansion plan of 1877. This second ring was nicknamed the “sober belt” due to its orderly residential neighborhoods with mostly medium-height closed blocks. However, despite Helmersbuurt's preserved appearance with only small changes occurring to its general organization and architectural character since conception, its transformation through time is quite broad. It encompasses a wide range of schematic urban planning interventions, to small-scale unit alterations.

Kalff’s expansion was intended to be superimposed with the existing fabric that followed the Stads Polder parcellation. In its original design, the area was organized with vast urban blocks. However following the approval of the 1877 expansion plan, Helmersbuurt was built by eager developers who purchased sizable amounts of land to construct residential perimeter blocks. The buildable area of these blocks was consequently increased following negotiations with development companies who pushed for subdividing the large blocks in Kalff’s plan for more built surface, and the municipality who supported wider street widths for accessibility. As a result, the urban blocks of Oud-West are organized following a grid of 45-meter-deep blocks and 15-meter-wide streets. Over time, this design standard has placed a strict limitation on the methods of extension and adaptation for the housing blocks on site.

Helmersbuurt’s limited spatial arrangement coupled with its preserved architectural heritage has made it one of the most sought-after yet costly residential neighborhoods in Amsterdam. The dynamic has led property owners seeking creative alternatives to meet contemporary housing demands and capitalize on their investments.
