---
meta:
  heading: Terpen
  period: [1552,1953]
viewer:
  bbox: [4.75621,51.756261,4.883734,51.835131]
  rotation: 0
allmaps:
  - label: River Map Werkendam, no. 14. First revision, series I, 1877. 703 x 995 mm, scale 1:10,000. Trésor Collection, TU Delft Library.
    annotation: firstrevision1877.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---

## Terpen - on the trade-off between controlling and accommodating the river

In the fifteenth century, a sequence of floods whereof the St. Elisabeth’s floods of 1421 and 1424 destroyed the polders of the vast area now called the Biesbosch. The extent of the damage and the high cost of repairs discouraged any attempt to restore the dikes. For a long period, the land was abandoned, becoming a so-called inland sea. It was only a century later that interest in cultivating the area was revived.

What if, shaken by the traumatic events of 1421, land reclamation in the inland sea had not been done by poldering but by building traditional dwelling mounds, the so-called terpen? This contribution explores the possibilities of human settlements on higher grounds and wetland-based agricultural systems in the natural estuary of the Biesbosch.

From the first organic agricultural terp-communities in the sixteenth century to mass-planned terp-networks serving monocultural cultivation of the river landscape in the twentieth century, a 500-year history of terpen in the Biesbosch is imagined. Dwelling mounds as spatial types are projected within the context of contemporaneous urbanistic and economic developments, ranging from local to national scale.

With rising water levels and accelerating soil subsidence, critical voices are emerging in the Netherlands about the risk of a persistent strategy of water defense through dikes and polders. The unraveling of a “terp-world” provides relevant insight into the potentials of alternative ways of living with the river.


Contribution by 

Ana Nuño de Buen

Felix Verheyden
