---
meta:
  heading: Het Pannerdensch Kanaal
  period: [1647-2022]
viewer:
  bbox: [6.069685,51.818323,6.157617,51.872646]
  rotation: 129
allmaps:
  - label: The Occasion and the Siege of Schenken-schans. 1647. 470 x 560 mm, scale 1:10,000. L.L. Schort. Gelders Archief.
    annotation: military.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
  - label: River Map. First revision, series I, 1873-1874. 900 x 600 mm, scale 1:10,000. P. Caland. Geoplaza, VU Amsterdam.
    annotation: firstrevisionmaps.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---
## On the arbitrary origin of infrastructure elements and their seemingly absolute nature

The Rhine River delta has been fraught with irregular water distribution throughout the seventeenth century resulting in frequent droughts and floods. During the Franco Dutch War of 1672 the water was so low that the French were able to easily traverse the river, in reaction to which the Pannerden Canal had to be constructed. Initially meant for strengthening military defenses and improving water distribution, it rapidly grew in size to accommodate larger ships for trade. Beginning in 1798, this bifurcation point (one-third to two-thirds) became the main determinant of the Dutch water regulation system, even though it was conceived without appropriate hydrological or territorial considerations.

What if alternative decisions were made that considered the river morphology, water regulation, trade considerations in addition to military concerns?

This contribution speculates on a few turns of events that would have led to changes in decision making, and an alternative location for the canal to the west of Nijmegen. This relocation of the bifurcation point would have resulted in expansive growth for the city and shipping industry as well as synchronization of the water system between the Maas, Waal, and IJssel.
The contribution outlines an alternative water and risk management strategy as well as resulting trade networks, growth patterns and freshwater facilities. Questioning one of the main and most permanent features of Dutch river regulation enables us to fundamentally rethink otherwise unimaginable solutions in light of the climatological challenges our river landscape currently faces.

Contribution by Lenneke Slangen and Yuhe Tan
