---
meta:
  heading: (Re)Construction Pannerden Canal
  period: [1647-2022]
viewer:
<<<<<<< HEAD
  bbox: [6.0636,51.814087,6.164491,51.876415]
  rotation: 130
allmaps:
  - label: Nieuwelijx gegraavene doorvaart bij Panderen, 1710
    annotation: doorvaartpannerden.json
=======
  bbox: [5.823583,51.867415,5.835084,51.874519]
  rotation: 36
allmaps:
  - label: Facsimile Kaart van den nieuwen mond der Neder-Rhijn boven het Pannerdensche, 1784
    annotation: oosterhoutcanaldetail.json
>>>>>>> parent of 86585a2 (Reorganization Slides)
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---

<<<<<<< HEAD
### _Introduction_

In the seventeenth century, the Rhine river delta faced difficulties regulating the water distribution, which became a weakness in the Dutch’ military defense strategy during the Dutch-Franco War (1672). The solution that was provided, the construction of a canal near Pannerden, was aimed specifically to improve the water distribution to enhance military strength. Due to hydrological issues, a regulated bifurcation point (⅓/⅔) was required, which since 1798, has become the main determinator of the Dutch’ water regulation strategy/system. 
The following scenario proposes an alternative development of the Rhine river area, which improved the rivers’ morphology, but took into consideration all aspects of military defense, trade, water regulation.

_Nieuwelijx gegraavene doorvaart bij Panderen, 1710_
=======
### _ii.    Bifurcation Technology_

The technology that was presented made use of groynes, which were often used to navigate the river. Rather than a technology that made use of conventional groynes; the proposed bifurcation technology made use of a structure of groynes of a larger scale. A revolutionary technology, although carried by many with concerns, which due to the urgent challenges faced was constructed for the first time. Connecting the city of Nijmegen with the capital city of Amsterdam, the distribution point was specified to distribute 40% of the Rhine water in the Oosterhout Canal and 60% in the Waal. 

_Facsimile Kaart van den nieuwen mond der Neder-Rhijn boven het Pannerdensche, 1784_
>>>>>>> parent of 86585a2 (Reorganization Slides)
