---
meta:
  heading: (Re)Construction Pannerden Canal
  period: [1647-2022]
viewer:
<<<<<<< HEAD
  bbox: [2.374274,50.643922,7.501745,53.783899]
  rotation: 0
allmaps:
  - label: Facsimile Regular Shipping Services With All Parts Of The World, 1935-1939
    annotation: rivermaps03nijmegen.json
=======
  bbox: [4.981821,51.599668,5.921764,52.179769]
  rotation: 0
allmaps:
  - label: Facsimile Overview Rivers Location Weircomplexes, 2022
    annotation: riversystem.json
>>>>>>> parent of 86585a2 (Reorganization Slides)
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---

<<<<<<< HEAD
### _ix.    Inland Shipping Capital Nijmegen_

The alternative location of the bifurcation point near Nijmegen could have led to an alternative city development within the Netherlands. The triangular organization of ports (Amsterdam, Nijmegen, Rotterdam) resulted, considerably, in inland- and outbound shipment ports evenly spread over the Netherlands that complemented each other economically. 
Instead of major city developments only happening at the edge of the Netherlands (near the sea), resulting in the ‘Randstad’, the triangular trade network would have resulted in a more even distribution of cities within the Netherlands. Potentially, the main cities’ configuration would have become horizontally positioned, as opposed to vertically positioned. Creating a ‘Bandstad’, from East to West as separative stroke supplying North and South. Would this have provided an alternative solution towards sea level rise?

Mention: Maas-Waal canal

_Facsimile Regular Shipping Services With All Parts Of The World, 1935-1939_
=======
### _x.    Alternative River System_

The positioning of Nijmegen in the trade triangle (Amsterdam, Nijmegen and Rotterdam) resulted in a large expansion of the port and growth of the city of Nijmegen. 

_Facsimile Overview Rivers Location Weircomplexes, 2022_
>>>>>>> parent of 86585a2 (Reorganization Slides)
