---
meta:
  heading: De Gemeenschappelijke Kernenergiecentrale Nederland
  period: [1969,2100]
viewer:
  bbox: [5.648646,51.883965,5.690256,51.909642]
  rotation: 0
allmaps:
  - label: River Map Gedeelte Waal (1982), no. 112, no. 113. Nieuwe stijl, 2023. Scale 1:5,000. The Berlage. Based on River Map Gedeelte Waal, no.112, no. 113. Nieuwe stijl, 1982. Photographs of film projections. Scale 1:5,000. Nationaal Archief, Den Haag.
    annotation: rivermap1982.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---

## On the sliding scale of accepted local environmental impact in the context of national energy interests

The Suez Crisis in 1956 sparked national interest in nuclear power as an alternative energy source. When natural gas was discovered in Groningen in 1959, the government and electricity providers lost momentum in the development of nuclear power. Only one nuclear power plant was built along the river.

What if natural gas were never discovered in Groningen? Nuclear energy production would be urgently promoted for national economic and technological independence. The contribution speculates on the landscape engineering processes for large scale nuclear energy production along the river, and on the consequential effects of the artificial and natural equilibrium shifts from current to future ecosystems.

NV Joint Nuclear Power Plant Netherlands (GKN) would have followed their original plan to construct four nuclear power plants, and drastically alter the Hiensche Waard. In 2010, Rijkswaterstaat would have started an investigation on the ecological system and ultimately proposed a re-naturalization plan for the floodplain. In 2100, the floodplain would have become a permanent nuclear waste facility.

Today, with the drastic decrease of natural gas production, the Netherlands is re-investing in nuclear energy as a solution to relevant environmental and financial instabilities. The contribution explores this probable energy source, investigating the power plants’ possible effect on the river landscape.

Contributions by Chaomin Chen and Maria Stergiou
