---
meta:
  heading: Uilenburg & Marken
viewer:
  bbox: [4.873342,52.363516,4.912113,52.386972]
  rotation: 140
xyz:
  url:
allmaps:
  - annotation: 1625slide1.json
    label: Berckenrode, Balthasar Florisz. “Map of Amsterdam.” Scale 1:1,950. Allard Pierson. Published by Philips Molenvliet, 1625. Orientation; south-southwest above. The map demonstrates that the shipbuilding industry populated the islands of Uilenburg and Marken.
    attribution:
      name: Allard Pierson
      url: https://hdl.handle.net/11245/3.39844
geojson:
  - filename:
    label:
---
# The origin of Uilenburg & Marken
Uilenburg is an island created for the purpose of shipbuilding during the Second Expansion of the city of Amsterdam in the late 16th century. As the city continued to grow, shipyards and carpentry factories moved eastwards in the 1700s, and land on the island was sold in small plots. It soon became a dense residential area flocked with mainly Jewish immigrant workers, a crowded slum with tiny living units and numerous back alleys. Small businesses occupied the ground floor while families lived in cramped rooms on the upper floors, and there were several factories and warehouses standing next to the canals. Albeit the difficult living conditions, it was a vibrant Jewish neighborhood. The Woningwet 1901 transformed not only the neighborhood-scale spatial organization of Uilenburg, but also its residential spaces. With most homes on Uilenburg identified as unsuitable for living, the island confronted a hasty large-scale demolition, making room for a widened central road and new houses on its sides. Over the course of the 20th Century with the developing public practice of regulating and managing residential spaces and neighborhoods, Uilenburg transformed into a quiet residential area with planned greenery, sanitary services and other public facilities. The changes on Uilenburg overtime is an epitome of Amsterdam’s progress and growth and later, the city’s long-lasting effort in improving urban living conditions.
