---
meta:
  heading: Uilenburg & Marken
viewer:
  bbox: [4.901205,52.367386,4.910893,52.373007]
  rotation: 140
geojson:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
    label: location
---
# The transformation of Uilenburg & Marken
The island Uilenburg was constructed as part of Amsterdam’s Second Extension in the late sixteenth century for shipbuilding. While frequently associated with its cramped conditions and the hasty early twentieth century demolition and reconstruction under Woningwet 1901, many non-residential structures survived the clearance and were later preserved and converted into different types of homes. The changes in domestic space in Uilenburg is an epitome of the city’s shifting attitude towards demolition and preservation, which led to shifts in home size, room number, block organization, and neighborhood facilities. 

During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with the influx of immigrants to Amsterdam, Uilenburg became home to a large Jewish population living in small houses that inherited the spatial layout of earlier shipyard worker dwellings. One family with over ten members would occupy a floor of twenty-five square meters, making the area a well-known slum in the inner city. Many had shops on the ground floor, and the streets were sites for vibrant markets. With the advent of the Enlightenment and its ideas on hygiene of the modern city, the Municipality of Amsterdam published Woningwet 1901, a housing act that declared the houses on Uilenburg “unlivable” because of their state of decay and congestion. Demolition was followed by the construction of new housing blocks with spacious units of sixty square meters and regulations on the number of occupants. The streets were merged and widened for traffic, and the street level no longer has commercial functions. Towards the late twentieth century, old warehouses from the seventeenth century were valued by developers and readapted into thirty-square-meter studio or one-bedroom apartments, preserving the original facades and interior structure.

Despite the common association of domestic space changes with private motivations, the changes in homes in Uilenburg were triggered by large-scale mechanisms such as policies, shifts in societal philosophies, and economic trends. The island transformed from a shipyard to a crowded mixed-use neighborhood, and eventually to a tranquil residential area today.
