---
meta:
  heading: Vijzelstraat
viewer:
  bbox: [4.883375,52.357701,4.90516,52.368538]
  rotation: 32
geojson:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
    label: Locations
legend:
  - label: Area of study
    fill: '#ffff54'
    fill-opacity: 1
    stroke: '#ffff54'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---
# The demolition of Vijzelstraat provided space for new infrastructure and buildings that changed the scale of the street while preserving its identity.
The Vijzelstraat, formed as part of Amsterdam’s Fourth Expansion, runs perpendicular to the high-end residential streets along the concentric canals of the historical center and is characterized by its commercial activity and contrast in scale on each side. The street was largely demolished and widened in the early twentieth century, changing it into a metropolitan boulevard. Despite its radical scale difference in contrast to the surrounding urban fabric, the street preserved its original commercial character to this day.

The demolition of Vijzelstraat was approved by the municipality in 1907 in order for the street to be widened from 10 meters to 22 meters. The project was commissioned to architect Karel De Bazel who translated the street’s original commercial activity into ground-floor arcades and wide sidewalks along the new buildings. The transformation was prompted by the technological advancements in transportation networks and emergence of new materials. The shift from horsecars to the tram system and car network, as well as the goal to establish a better connection to the south as part of the south expansion of the city under Kalff’s Plan, were key factors to the infrastructural changes. The turn of the twentieth century introduced steel, concrete, and improved building techniques that emancipated the ground floor and enabled new buildings to grow in height. The newly constructed buildings on the west side of Vijzelstraat introduced a new scale, along with a programmatic shift from the previous houses with small ground floor shops to a mixed-use residential building and the headquarters of the Nederlandsche Handel Maatschappij. The east side of the street retained its nineteenth century profile. 

The infrastructural changes and the scale of the new buildings formed part of a process of cityvorming, and indicated a metropolitan ambition that was inspired by urban planning trends over the world in the early twentieth century, in cities like Paris and New York. However, with the design of the street profile and preservation of commercial use, continuity with the surrounding fabric was sought.