---
meta:
  heading: Bijlmermeer
viewer:
  bbox: [4.965186,52.310662,4.990846,52.324679]
  rotation: 0
geojson:
  - filename: mothermap.geojson
    label: Locations
legend:
  - label: Area of study
    fill: '#ffff54'
    fill-opacity: 1
    stroke: '#ffff54'
    stroke-opacity: 1
---
# General Argument
Bijlmermeer’s design took its first steps in 1962, when the Public Works Department developed an expansion to the original AUP. Originally imagined as a satellite neighborhood for Amsterdam based on the CIAM principles, since the late 1960’s the Bijlmer has witnessed a layered history of social dynamics, with numerous proposals imagined but never realized. Only in the early 1990’s the large-scale renewal plans took off, physically reshaping the neighborhood.

Planned by Siegfried Nassuth, the Bijlmer was to provide 50,000 people with a comfortable and modern alternative to a densely populated center. The neighborhood’s distinguishing feature has been the 1:9 ratio between private and public areas. This dominating presence of (semi-) public areas has provoked an ambiguous threshold of responsibilities, defining the site’s transformation ever since. It can be summarized in four phases: first, a wave of immigration from Suriname started in 1975. Demographic changes sparked new unplanned activities and the maaiveld became a space for collective gatherings. Second, the period of negation and speculation up until 1992. The 1986 proposal by OMA emphasized public spaces and activities in-between buildings, serving as a symbol for the Bijlmer’s potential. Lastly, the 1992 Bijlmerramp tragedy activated major changes in the public spaces and built fabric - 50% of which was torn down by 2012, giving way for a denser low-rise urbanization.


Although the maaiveld has experienced a rich history of ideas it has not been fully realized due to the  ambiguous nature of responsibility involved in decision-making on the Bijlmer’s vast scale and the complexities that such process entails. This fact makes Bijlmer’s public space an equally important projection plane for the urban imaginary