---
meta:
  heading: Rotterdam aan de Rivier
  period: [1701,1955]
viewer:
  bbox: [4.456129,51.890879,4.516085,51.927867]
  rotation: 0
allmaps:
  - label: River Map, Rotterdam, no. 18. Second revision, serie II, 1936, scale 1:5,000. Geoplaza, VU Amsterdam. Signature LL.11007gk.
    attribution:
      name: Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam Geoplaza
      url: https://geoplaza.vu.nl/cms/
    annotation: rivermap1936.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---
## Rotterdam aan de Rivier: on the capacity of policy and decision-making processes to respond to longer term, larger scale natural developments

In the early eighteenth century the Rhine and the IJssel began silting up, making shipping increasingly difficult. The Rhine municipalities saw the solution in regulating the water flow by means of a canal connecting the Rhine to the Waal. While the Waal municipalities disagreed, the Pannerden Canal was opened in 1710.

What if the Pannerden Canal was never connected to the Rhine as a result of these disputes leading to the gradual decline of the Rhine until it became completely unfit for transport? The contribution speculates on changes in the spatial, economic, social, legislative, and juridical structure of Rotterdam without its port.

In the aftermath of WWll, maritime trade, expansion of the port and the annexation of adjacent municipalities all would have come to a halt. If the Rhine would have continued to silt up then the city would have been forced to eventually re-envision itself as a post-industrial town with a historic center, an attractive riverfront and prime recreational facilities. With the ever-increasing possibilities for long distance-traveling, the future of Rotterdam would revolve around tourism and service industries.

Nowadays it is difficult to imagine Rotterdam without its port. However, with worsening climate change the eventual silting of the Rhine becomes credible. This contribution aims to rethink the status quo and draw an alternative lineage with contemporary recreational initiatives in the floodplains such as Room for the River.


Contribution by 

Ujal Gorchu

Nien Heng Yang

