---
meta:
  heading: De Roode Week
  period: [1918,1936]
viewer:
  bbox: [4.337339,51.885429,4.410003,51.930259]
  rotation: 0
allmaps:
  - label: River Map Rotterdam (second edition), no. 18. First revision, serie II, 1904. Scale 1:10,000. Geoplaza, VU Amsterdam. National Archives. Signature LL.11007gk.
    annotation: rotterdam1904.json
    opacity: 100
    mask: rgb(255,0,0)
    colorize: rgb(255,0,0)
---
## De Roode Week

## on the scope of influence of political ideology on spatial planning and design

The Red Week (De Roode Week) was a failed socialist revolution in the Netherlands in November of 1918 led by the Dutch socialist Pieter Jelles Troelstra. Instead, the Netherlands remained a constitutional monarchy, promoting capitalist growth and commerce.

What if the uprising removed monarchical power and created a socialist state? What would the development of industry, housing, and spatial planning in a socialist Netherlands look like? How would patterns of growth develop in Rotterdam’s port? The contribution speculates on the spatial and ideological implications of a socialist leadership for the port of Rotterdam.

In 1928, a national architecture competition would have been announced for “The Industrial Settlement for Shipbuilders” in Rotterdam. The paternalistic relationship between the workers and independent industries which was dominant in the recent housing development of Heijplaat, would be confronted by the winning design of the competition. Opposing the garden city and inspired by “disurbanist vision,” the proposal would have rearranged the Waalhaven as a prototype for industrial growth. Its implementation would happen in 1930 and would be traced on the River Map of 1936.

Nowadays the Port of Rotterdam has moved towards the sea, while some of the harbors closer to the city center are converted into mixed-use districts, in which port-related activities and residential blocks coexist. This contribution explores how historically ideology has steered the architecture of industrial settlements, and the design of the relation between harbors and housing development.

Contribution by Thomas Gkikas and Eliott Moreau